PARQUET-1950: Define core features (#164)
apache/parquet-format: CoreFeatures.md

  - to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
  - "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
  - with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
  -
  -   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
  -
  - Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
  - software distributed under the License is distributed on an
  - "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
  - KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
  - specific language governing permissions and limitations
  - under the License.
  -->

# Parquet Core Features

This document lists the core features for each parquet-format release. This
list is a subset of the features which parquet-format makes available.

## Purpose

The list of core features for a certain release makes a compliance level for
implementations. If a writer implementation claims that it is at a certain
compliance level then it must use only features from the *core feature list* of
that parquet-format release. If a reader implementation claims the same if must
implement all of the listed features. This way it is easier to ensure

> compatibility between the different parquet implementations.

Reviewer: Parquet

We cannot and don't want to stop our clients to use any features that are not
on this list but it shall be highlighted that using these features might make

> the written parquet files unreadable by other implementations. We can say that

Reviewer: Parquet

the features available in a parquet-format release (and one of the
implementations of it) and not on the *core feature list* are experimental.

## Versioning

This document is versioned by the parquet-format releases which follows the
scheme of semantic versioning. It means that no feature will be deleted from
this document under the same major version. (We might deprecate some, though.)
Because of the semantic versioning if one implementation supports the core
features of the parquet-format release `a.b.x` it must be able to read any

> parquet files written by implementations supporting the release `a.d.y` where

Reviewer: Parquet

> `b >= d`.

Reviewer: nit: switch b and d in this example

> If a parquet file is written according to a released version of this document

Reviewer: Parquet

it might be a good idea to write this version into the field `compliance_level`

> in the thrift object `FileMetaData`.

Reviewer: Thrift (capitalize elsewhere)

## Adding new features

The idea is to only include features which are specified correctly and proven
to be useful for everyone. Because of that we require to have at least two
different implementations that are released and widely tested. We also require
to implement interoperability tests for that feature to prove one
implementation can read the data written by the other one and vice versa.

## Core feature list

> This list is based on the [parquet thrift file](src/main/thrift/parquet.thrift)

Reviewer: Parquet

> where all the data structures we might use in a parquet file are defined.

Reviewer: Parquet

### File structure

All of the required fields in the structure (and sub-structures) of
`FileMetaData` must be set according to the specification.
The following page types are supported:
* Data page V1 (see `DataPageHeader`)
* Dictionary page (see `DictionaryPageHeader`)

**TODO**: list optional fields that must be filled properly.

### Types

#### Primitive types

The following [primitive types](README.md#types) are supported
* `BOOLEAN`
* `INT32`
* `INT64`
* `FLOAT`
* `DOUBLE`
* `BYTE\_ARRAY`
* `FIXED\_LEN\_BYTE\_ARRAY`

NOTE: The primitive type `INT96` is deprecated so it is intentionally not listed
here.

#### Logical types

The [logical type](LogicalTypes.md)s are practically annotations helping to
understand the related primitive type (or structure). Originally we have had

> the `ConvertedType` enum in the thrift file representing all the possible

Reviewer: Thrift

logical types. After a while we realized it is hard to extend and so introduced
the `LogicalType` union. For backward compatibility reasons we allow to use the
old `ConvertedType` values according to the specified rules but we expect that
the logical types in the file schema are defined with `LogicalType` objects.

The following LogicalTypes are supported:
* `STRING`
* `MAP`
* `LIST`
* `ENUM`
* `DECIMAL` (for which primitives?)
* `DATE`
* `TIME`: **(Which unit, utc?)**
* `TIMESTAMP`: **(Which unit, utc?)**
* `INTEGER`: (all bitwidth 8, 16, 32, 64) **(unsigned?)**
* `UNKNOWN` **(?)**
* `JSON` **(?)**
* `BSON` **(?)**

> * `UUID` **(?)**

Reviewer 2: The last three seem highly application-specific. For example, Arrow doesn't have native types for them.

Reviewer 3: This is a good point. I think this is true for logical types in general - if the application doesn't support the type at all, then it's a limitation of the application, not the application's Parquet implementation. It's reasonable for applications to not want to handle, say, timestamps.

Of course parquet-mr and parquet-cpp need to be able to at least pass through the data to the application in all of these cases.

So maybe all of these need to be qualified:
- If the implementation is general-purpose Parquet library, users of the library must be able to access data with all logical types. It may just return the data in the same format as the primitive type. E.g. if JSON is just returned as a STRING, that seems fine.
- If the implementation is anything else (SQL engine, computation framework, etc), then if it supports a primitive or logical type, it must support all core features associated with that type.

E.g. suppose you have an application that only processes DECIMAL values. It might be a bad and useless application, but that's not Parquet's problem. If it can read and write all DECIMAL encodings correctly, then it's compliant. If it couldn't read decimals stored as int64, or if it wrote decimals with precision < 10, it's not compliant (see https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/LogicalTypes.md#decimal).

Reviewer 2: That sounds fine to me.

Author: I think, this topic is not that simple. However parquet-mr usually returns values related to the primitive types only (no conversion for logical type) there are some additional logic that depends on the logical type.
* For example the sorting order matters when we are talking about statistics (min/max for row groups or column indexes). The sorting order might depend on the logical type (e.g. BINARY as a STRING or as a DECIMAL).
* In your example about JSON you cannot return a String if you don't know that the related BINARY primitive contains an UTF-8 encoded value.
* We have many problems with the different semantics used for timestamps in the different projects. This problem cannot be solved entirely in parquet but it can be the base of the solution. That's why we introduced the new timestamp logical type.
* Some parquet-mr bindings (e.g. parquet-avro) do depend on the logical types when converting values
* We already found some issues with the string representation. Impala did not write the logical type UTF-8 for strings only the primitive type BINARY. Meanwhile, iceberg required to have this logical type otherwise it recognized the value as a binary and it did not work with it.

To summarize, we might not add all of the logical types (or not all of the primitive representations) to the *core features* but I think, we shall add at least the ones already used widely. The whole *core features* idea is about to help interoperability. Logical types are a big part of it.

Although, from interoperability point of view a read-only parquet implementation that cannot do anything with the concept of DECIMAL it might not implement the reading of it. But if one would like to write a UTF-8 string than we shall require to use a STRING logical type in the schema for it.

Reviewer 2: > In your example about JSON you cannot return a String if you don't know that the related BINARY primitive contains an UTF-8 encoded value.

In practice that shouldn't be very problematic, as most JSON should be UTF8-encoded (note that the [IETF standard](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7159) requires either UTF-8, UTF-16 or UTF-32, and states that UTF-8 is the default encoding).

> The whole core features idea is about to help interoperability. Logical types are a big part of it.

Agreed. The question is: what does _supporting_ a logical type mean? For example, if I accept JSON data and simply present it as regular string data, is that enough to say that I support it? Otherwise, am I supposed to do something specific?

Author: My JSON example tried to point out that you have to recognize the logical type JSON to know it is a UTF-8 encoded string and not an arbitrary BINARY value. So in this case you at least partly support the logical type JSON.

As per the specification a value with the logical type JSON has to be a UTF-8 encoded json document (json spec referenced). What the parquet implementation does with it is not part of the parquet spec. So, from write point of view you  shall only use this annotation if it is really a json and is in UTF-8. From read point of view it is up to the implementation I guess.

I agree it is not always clear what to specify for supporting a logical type from reading. At least it shall respect the semantics of the related type. For example in case of TIMESTAMP if isAdjustedToUTC is true then the timestamp value shall be represented according to the *instant* semantics otherwise to the *local* semantics. (See details [here](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/LogicalTypes.md#timestamp).) Similarly even though UUID is represented in a binary format it is highly suggested to be represented in the UUID string format when displayed (if UUID logical type is supported).

Author: We shall agree on the list of the supported logical types and their primitive representations if there are more options. 

For the "support" point of view I would add something like the following.
> The writer shall support every listed logical types by either respecting its syntax/semantics or not using the related types at all. (For example if a writer does not use and therefore write any timestamp typed data it may still support the related version of core features.) The reader shall support every listed logical types where the related semantics matches one of its own data types. The reader can either convert the values of the other listed logical types to one of its own data type respecting the syntax/semantics (e.g. representing a timestamp as a string) or not reading these types. In the latter case the reader shall still recognize the related logical type and it shall be clear to the user that the file contains data that could not be represented. (The key here is if the reader has internal data representation for a semantics specified by one of these logical types it shall support reading it. Otherwise it shall either represent it in a meaningful way or not reading and notifying the user.)

What do you think?

Reviewer 2: It's a bit difficult to read to me, what do you call "related type"?

Author: Yeah, I guessed so. I am not very good at it and that's why I've tried to write something here instead of in the document at the first place.

I would like to formalize the following idea. Writer writes a logical type if has a data type with similar semantics. It is allowed to not to write some logical types if there are no similar values to write (kind of common sense). Reader have to recognize all the listed logical types and either convert (or read as is) to one of its own types or if no such internal types exists it may not read such values but have to inform the user. We do not want misinterpreted or silently skipped values.

Reviewer 2: So it is not ok for a reader to ignore the logical type and still interpret the data based on the physical type?

Author: It is not. Logical types can significantly modify the meaning of a primitive type. Back to one of my examples. A BINARY primitive type can be a STRING or a DECIMAL. Even the statistics (min/max) are different for these two.

Reviewer 2: That makes sense, thank you.

NOTE: The old ConvertedType `INTERVAL` has no representation in LogicalTypes.
This is becasue `INTERVAL` is deprecated so we do not include it in this list.

### Encodings

The following encodings are supported:
* [PLAIN](Encodings.md#plain-plain--0)  
  parquet-mr: Basically all value types are written in this encoding in case of
  V1 pages
* [PLAIN\_DICTIONARY](Encodings.md#dictionary-encoding-plain_dictionary--2-and-rle_dictionary--8)
  **(?)**  
  parquet-mr: As per the spec this encoding is deprecated while we still use it
  for V1 page dictionaries.
* [RLE](Encodings.md#run-length-encoding--bit-packing-hybrid-rle--3)  

>   parquet-mr: Used for both V1 and V2 pages to encode RL and DL and for BOOLEAN

Reviewer: This is the first time these abbreviations are used

Author: The parts describing how the parquet-mr implementations work were not meant to be part of the final document. As I don't know too much about other implementations I've felt it is good to note the current behavior so others may understand the situation better. After a consensus of the related topic made I would remove this note.

  values in case of V2 pages
* [DELTA\_BINARY\_PACKED](Encodings.md#delta-encoding-delta_binary_packed--5)
  **(?)**  
  parquet-mr: Used for V2 pages to encode INT32 and INT64 values.
* [DELTA\_LENGTH\_BYTE\_ARRAY](Encodings.md#delta-length-byte-array-delta_length_byte_array--6)
  **(?)**  
  parquet-mr: Not used directly
* [DELTA\_BYTE\_ARRAY](Encodings.md#delta-strings-delta_byte_array--7)
  **(?)**  
  parquet-mr: Used for V2 pages to encode BYTE\_ARRAY and
  FIXED\_LEN\_BYTE\_ARRAY values
* [RLE\_DICTIONARY](Encodings.md#dictionary-encoding-plain_dictionary--2-and-rle_dictionary--8)
  **(?)**  
  parquet-mr: Used for V2 page dictionaries
* [BYTE\_STREAM\_SPLIT](Encodings.md#byte-stream-split-byte_stream_split--9)
  **(?)**  
  parquet-mr: Not used by default; can be used only via explicit configuration

NOTE: [BIT\_PACKED](Encodings.md#bit-packed-deprecated-bit_packed--4) is
deprecated and not used directly (boolean values are encoded with this under
PLAIN) so not included in this list.

### Compression

The following compression algorithms are supported (including `UNCOMPRESSED`).
* `SNAPPY`
* `GZIP`

> * `BROTLI` **(?)**

Reviewer: Is LZO deprecated? If so we should state that

Author: I am not sure if we want to list every possibility based on the format and state whether it is supported or not. LZO was removed after [these comments](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/pull/164#discussion_r541122019).

<!--
  - Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
  - or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
  - distributed with this work for additional information
  - regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
  - to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
  - "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
  - with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
  -
  -   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
  -
  - Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
  - software distributed under the License is distributed on an
  - "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
  - KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
  - specific language governing permissions and limitations
  - under the License.
  -->

# Parquet Core Features

This document lists the core features for each parquet-format release. This
list is a subset of the features which parquet-format makes available.

## Purpose

> The list of core features for a certian release makes a compliance level that

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The list of core features for a certain release makes a compliance level that
```

> the different implementations can tied to. If an implementation claims that it

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
for implementations . If an implementation claims that it
```

provides the functionality of a parquet-format release core features it must

> implement all of the listed features according the specification (both read and

Reviewer 4: nit: What happens if an implementation happens to be read only?  It seems like distinguishing compliance for reading and writing could make sense.

Author: Good point, I'll do that.

write path). This way it is easier to ensure compatibility between the
different parquet implementations.
We cannot and don't want to stop our clients to use any features that are not
on this list but it shall be highlighted that using these features might make
the written parquet files unreadable by other implementations. We can say that
the features available in a parquet-format release (and one of the

> implementations of it) and not on this list are experimental.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
implementations of it) and not on the core feature list are experimental.
```

## Versioning

This document is versioned by the parquet-format releases which follows the
scheme of semantic versioning. It means that no feature will be deleted from
this document under the same major version. (We might deprecate some, though.)
Because of the semantic versioning if one implementation supports the core
features of the parquet-format release `a.b.x` it must be able to read any
parquet files written by implementations supporting the release `a.d.y` where
`b >= d`.

If a parquet file is written according to a released version of this document
it might be a good idea to write this version into the field `compliance_level`
in the thrift object `FileMetaData`.

## Adding new features

The idea is to only include features which are specified correctly and proven

> to be useful for everyone. Because of that we require to have at least two

Reviewer 4: In arrow we've adopted the need to for an integration test demonstrating compatibility.  This might be a good idea for new feature in parquet as well?

Author: I think it is more ant interoperability test than an integration one. Anyway it is a good idea to add this requirement here.

different implementations that are released and widely tested.

> ## The "list"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Core feature list
```

This list is based on the [parquet thrift file](src/main/thrift/parquet.thrift)
where all the data structures we might use in a parquet file are defined.

### File structure

All of the required fields in the structure (and sub-structures) of
`FileMetaData` must be set according to the specification.
The following page types are supported:
* Data page V1 (see `DataPageHeader`)

> * Dictionary page (see `DictionaryPageHeader`)

Reviewer 4: it might make sense to also call out here status of data page v2.

Author: You mean as a note? I am currently not sure if data page v2 worth to be supported at all. It was never widely used and the benefits of it are more about using some more advanced encodings and not the v2 page header itself.
So, I am not sure about the status of v2.

Reviewer 2: Doesn't the data page v2 header allow selective compression of individual pages?

Author: Based on parquet.thrift V2 only allows to select if a page is compressed or not. The compression codec is specified in `ColumnMetaData` so it can be set by column (and not page) for both V1 and V2.

Reviewer 2: Well, if some pages don't compress well you can skip the CPU cost of compression for them (I suppose that was the rationale for adding this feature?).

Author: I guess so. It sounds reasonably. I hope someone will join to the review who have deeper knowledge on these.

If we think V2 data page header worth it I am not against adding to the list for the first or maybe a later release. But first, we should list all the pros/cons.

Reviewer 3: I like the selective compression feature personally, it's a smart idea. The other DataPageV2 layout changes wrt rep/def levels make sense.

We haven't implemented it in Impala, but it would be worthwhile if we determine that it's going to be universally supported (chicken/egg problem - no point implementing if we can't turn it on).

Reviewer 3: It looks like parquet-cpp added support - https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/PARQUET-458 so maybe we're the odd ones out now. https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/IMPALA-6433 is the Impala JIRA

@wesm  said "BTW V2 files are not considered suitable for production by the Parquet community" - https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/PARQUET-458?focusedCommentId=16931914&page=com.atlassian.jira.plugin.system.issuetabpanels%3Acomment-tabpanel#comment-16931914

This is probably relevant - not sure what issues he's referring to though.

Reviewer: I meant that they aren't widely supported, so if you use it you will find implementations that can't read your files (per the chicken/egg problem above)

Author: So, what would be the general approach here? Do we want to add V2 to the first release of core features so we expect all the implementations to support it or we leave it for a next release?

Reviewer 2: "Stable" is unfortunately underdefined here. It certainly seems stable as far as the _format_ is concerned. It's not necessarily widely implemented, though both parquet-mr and Parquet C++ support it.

Reviewer 5: Trino also supports reading V2 data pages. However, when we attempted to use it in our parquet writer, we discovered other engines failed to read it https://github.com/trinodb/trino/issues/6377
There was confusion about whether V2 is officially finalised https://github.com/trinodb/trino/issues/7953#issuecomment-872544273
I believe support for V2 pages in other engines has also improved since then.
If it's simply a matter of adoption, then it would help to have some clarity about it in the spec (like for example acknowledging it as a core feature here) so that someone implementing a parquet writer can be assured that writing V2 pages is not some experimental feature that can be deprecated from the format.

  values in case of V2 pages
* [DELTA\_BINARY\_PACKED](Encodings.md#delta-encoding-delta_binary_packed--5)
  **(?)**  
  parquet-mr: Used for V2 pages to encode INT32 and INT64 values.
* [DELTA\_LENGTH\_BYTE\_ARRAY](Encodings.md#delta-length-byte-array-delta_length_byte_array--6)
  **(?)**  
  parquet-mr: Not used directly
* [DELTA\_BYTE\_ARRAY](Encodings.md#delta-strings-delta_byte_array--7)
  **(?)**  
  parquet-mr: Used for V2 pages to encode BYTE\_ARRAY and
  FIXED\_LEN\_BYTE\_ARRAY values
* [RLE\_DICTIONARY](Encodings.md#dictionary-encoding-plain_dictionary--2-and-rle_dictionary--8)
  **(?)**  
  parquet-mr: Used for V2 page dictionaries
* [BYTE\_STREAM\_SPLIT](Encodings.md#byte-stream-split-byte_stream_split--9)
  **(?)**  
  parquet-mr: Not used by default; can be used only via explicit configuration

NOTE: [BIT\_PACKED](Encodings.md#bit-packed-deprecated-bit_packed--4) is
deprecated and not used directly (boolean values are encoded with this under
PLAIN) so not included in this list.

**TODO**: In parquet-mr dictionary encoding is not enabled for
FIXED\_LEN\_BYTE\_ARRAY in case of writing V1 pages. I don't know the reason

> behind. Any experience/idea about this from other implementations?

Reviewer 3: Impala does this for decimal values. I think this is fine and makes sense to do. E.g. in the TPC-H and probably TPC-DS data sets there are some cardinality decimal columns

[localhost.EXAMPLE.COM:21050] default> show column stats tpch_parquet.lineitem;
Query: show column stats tpch_parquet.lineitem
+-----------------+---------------+------------------+--------+----------+---------------+--------+---------+
| Column          | Type          | #Distinct Values | #Nulls | Max Size | Avg Size      | #Trues | #Falses |
+-----------------+---------------+------------------+--------+----------+---------------+--------+---------+
| l_orderkey      | BIGINT        | 1563438          | 0      | 8        | 8.0           | -1     | -1      |
| l_partkey       | BIGINT        | 200516           | 0      | 8        | 8.0           | -1     | -1      |
| l_suppkey       | BIGINT        | 9712             | 0      | 8        | 8.0           | -1     | -1      |
| l_linenumber    | INT           | 7                | 0      | 4        | 4.0           | -1     | -1      |
| l_quantity      | DECIMAL(12,2) | 51               | 0      | 8        | 8.0           | -1     | -1      |
| l_extendedprice | DECIMAL(12,2) | 868550           | 0      | 8        | 8.0           | -1     | -1      |
| l_discount      | DECIMAL(12,2) | 11               | 0      | 8        | 8.0           | -1     | -1      |
| l_tax           | DECIMAL(12,2) | 9                | 0      | 8        | 8.0           | -1     | -1      |
| l_returnflag    | STRING        | 3                | 0      | 1        | 1.0           | -1     | -1      |
| l_linestatus    | STRING        | 2                | 0      | 1        | 1.0           | -1     | -1      |
| l_shipdate      | STRING        | 2629             | 0      | 10       | 10.0          | -1     | -1      |
| l_commitdate    | STRING        | 2559             | 0      | 10       | 10.0          | -1     | -1      |
| l_receiptdate   | STRING        | 2658             | 0      | 10       | 10.0          | -1     | -1      |
| l_shipinstruct  | STRING        | 4                | 0      | 17       | 11.9986381531 | -1     | -1      |
| l_shipmode      | STRING        | 7                | 0      | 7        | 4.28530454636 | -1     | -1      |
| l_comment       | STRING        | 4652621          | 0      | 43       | 26.4941692352 | -1     | -1      |
+-----------------+---------------+------------------+--------+----------+---------------+--------+---------+

Reviewer 4: I believe Arrow/Parquet CPP also does dictionary encoding here (would need to double check).

Author: Thanks for the info. I'll remove this TODO.

### Compression

The following compression algorithms are supported (including `UNCOMPRESSED`).
* `SNAPPY`
* `GZIP`

> * `LZO` **(?)**

Reviewer 3: Licensing of LZO may be an issue for some (main implementation is GPL, not Apache-compatible).

Author: I am fine removing LZO because of the licensing. Also, I am not sure if it would have significant benefits comparing to the others (LZ4 or ZSTD).

Reviewer 2: parquet-cpp doesn't support LZO, FTR. Also, I'm not sure LZO is interesting nowadays, compared to LZ4 and ZSTD.

Reviewer 3: Yeah LZO doesn't stack up that well - https://facebook.github.io/zstd/. I think you can make a case for zstd+lz4 or zstd or none being part of core.

It does have some advantages for text files because the container format and index file feature allowed splitting, but that's completely irrelevant for Parquet.

> * `LZO` **(?)**

Reviewer 4: From a C++ perspective the licensing on LZO libraries is problematic I believe (we had an old JIRA to implement but I think it was closed for this reason).

* `BROTLI` **(?)**
* `LZ4` **(?)**

> * `ZSTD` **(?)**

Reviewer 3: I would love to use LZ4/ZSTD more cause the performance/density benefits can be significant; not sure which implementations have support yet though (Impala has both as of the 3.3 release).

Author: The big question here is if the other implementations can guarantee to read/write these compressions. For example parquet-mr uses hadoop for some of these therefore it depends on the environment if support them or not. If we put these to the core features parquet-mr cannot rely on the environment to provide the related codecs. (According to https://github.com/airlift/aircompressor it does not seem to be a big deal just requires some efforts and testing.)

Reviewer 2: parquet-cpp has recently fixed its LZ4 support to be compatible with the weird encoding used by parquet-mr.

Reviewer 3: What does it mean that it uses hadoop for the codec? Does that mean it's difficult or impossible in some environments to enable the compression codecs?

We ran into the same LZ4 issue too - https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/IMPALA-8617

Author: Parquet-mr does not ship all of the codec implementations it supports. E.g. we do not unit test LZO, LZ4 and ZSTD because they are "not distributed in the default version of Hadoop". It means it is up to the user to install the related codecs to the hadoop environment so parquet-mr can use them. (It might mean that in some environments it is not possible to use some codecs but I don't have too mush experience in this.) This is the current situation.
That's why I've said if we add these codecs to the *core features* than parquet-mr have to add the implementations of these codecs (as direct dependencies) so it can guarantee the codecs are accessible in any situation.

Reviewer 2: For the record, we (meaning @chairmank) discovered an incompatibility in the LZ4 compatibility code that was added to Parquet C++ to handle Hadoop-produced files: see https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/ARROW-11301

Reviewer 2: As an update, while we (parquet-cpp) managed to fix the aforementioned compatibility issue, another compatibility issue appeared in the other direction (LZ4-compressed files produced by parquet-cpp cannot be read back by parquet-java): https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/PARQUET-1974

At this point, it seems the lack of specification around LZ4 compression makes it basically impossible to implement in a compatible manner. Therefore it shouldn't be in this spec.

Reviewer 2: I've proposed a new `LZ4_RAW` codec in #168, where I also deprecate the current `LZ4` codec.

Author: I'll remove `LZ4` from here. I guess we cannot add `LZ4_RAW` here yet.

### Statistics

> However understanding statistics is not crucial to read the data in a file we

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Statistics are not required for reading data but incorrect or under specified statistics implementation can cause data loss.
```

The following LogicalTypes are supported:
* `STRING`
* `MAP`
* `LIST`
* `ENUM`
* `DECIMAL` (for which primitives?)
* `DATE`
* `TIME`: **(Which unit, utc?)**
* `TIMESTAMP`: **(Which unit, utc?)**
* `INTEGER`: (all bitwidth 8, 16, 32, 64) **(unsigned?)**
* `UNKNOWN` **(?)**
* `JSON` **(?)**
* `BSON` **(?)**
* `UUID` **(?)**

NOTE: The old ConvertedType `INTERVAL` has no representation in LogicalTypes.
This is becasue `INTERVAL` is deprecated so we do not include it in this list.

### Encodings

The following encodings are supported:
* [PLAIN](Encodings.md#plain-plain--0)  
  parquet-mr: Basically all value types are written in this encoding in case of
  V1 pages
* [PLAIN\_DICTIONARY](Encodings.md#dictionary-encoding-plain_dictionary--2-and-rle_dictionary--8)
  **(?)**  
  parquet-mr: As per the spec this encoding is deprecated while we still use it
  for V1 page dictionaries.
* [RLE](Encodings.md#run-length-encoding--bit-packing-hybrid-rle--3)  
  parquet-mr: Used for both V1 and V2 pages to encode RL and DL and for BOOLEAN
  values in case of V2 pages
* [DELTA\_BINARY\_PACKED](Encodings.md#delta-encoding-delta_binary_packed--5)
  **(?)**  

>   parquet-mr: Used for V2 pages to encode INT32 and INT64 values.

Reviewer 5: While this notes the current status for parquet-mr, it would greatly help to have a clarification in the spec about whether the delta encodings are only allowed with V2 Data pages or if it's legal to use delta encodings in V1 Data pages as well. Or in other words, is the choice of encodings linked in any way to the choice of V1 or V2 in the data page ?

Reviewer 2: AFAIU, the choice of _data_ encodings is orthogonal to the choice of V1 or V2 data pages. But different default values may be applied based on which version the user asks for.

Reviewer 5: > the choice of data encodings is orthogonal to the choice of V1 or V2 data pages

That's what I'm hoping for as well, however the spec doesn't say explicitly if it is valid to write delta encodings in V1 pages. The parquet-mr implementation does not use any delta encodings in V1 pages. Keeping this ambiguous in the spec means that someone implementing a writer cannot be sure about whether the various projects implementing readers will consider this a valid input. It's also not clear to me whether parquet-mr has tests guaranteeing that this works given that parquet-mr itself will not do this.

Reviewer 2: > That's what I'm hoping for as well, however the spec doesn't say explicitly if it is valid to write delta encodings in V1 pages. 

Can you open a separate issue about that?

Reviewer 5: Sure, what's the appropriate place to open issues ? GH issues seem to be disabled on this repo.

Reviewer 2: Yes, you need to open a JIRA issue. See here: https://parquet.apache.org/community/

* [DELTA\_LENGTH\_BYTE\_ARRAY](Encodings.md#delta-length-byte-array-delta_length_byte_array--6)
  **(?)**  

>   parquet-mr: Not used directly

Reviewer 5: While parquet-mr does not use this directly, the spec currently says that "This encoding is always preferred over PLAIN for byte array columns" at https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/Encodings.md#delta-length-byte-array-delta_length_byte_array--6
So why doesn't parquet-mr use DELTA_LENGTH_BYTE_ARRAY instead of PLAIN for byte arrays ?
As an implementor, it's not clear to me how should the line `parquet-mr: Not used directly` be interpreted.
Is this recommending doing exactly what parquet-mr does regarding usage of encodings or should implementors use their own judgement or should we follow the prescription of the spec at https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/Encodings.md#delta-length-byte-array-delta_length_byte_array--6 regardless of what parquet-mr is doing ?

Reviewer 5: That might be true from the point of view of compression, however the decoder logic is more complicated with DELTA_BYTE_ARRAY and decoding speed could be slower.
If DELTA_BYTE_ARRAY is always the better choice, the spec should instead recommend that DELTA_BYTE_ARRAY should always be preferred over PLAIN for byte array columns and explicitly discourage using DELTA_LENGTH_BYTE_ARRAY directly as an encoding for byte arrays.

Reviewer 2: I don't think the spec should recommend an encoding over another one. It should clearly document the advantages and drawbacks of each encoding, so that implementations and applications can make an informed choice.

Reviewer 5: If the spec would simply provide guidelines and not be opinionated consistently in every case, that would be okay too. However, that doesn't appear to be the case today given the above recommendation of DELTA_LENGTH over PLAIN in the current spec. This PR is also highlighting the specific encodings chosen by parquet-mr along with choice of V1/V2 page format, which gives me the impression that any choice than what is mentioned here is not really recommended even if it exists in the spec.

Reviewer 2: > However, that doesn't appear to be the case today given the above recommendation of DELTA_LENGTH over PLAIN in the current spec.

This may deserve a separate issue, then.

not include these features in this document and therefore the field `file_path`
is not supported.

### Types

#### Primitive types

The following [primitive types](README.md#types) are supported
* `BOOLEAN`
* `INT32`
* `INT64`
* `FLOAT`
* `DOUBLE`
* `BYTE\_ARRAY`
* `FIXED\_LEN\_BYTE\_ARRAY`

NOTE: The primitive type `INT96` is deprecated so it is intentionally not listed
here.

#### Logical types

The [logical type](LogicalTypes.md)s are practically annotations helping to
understand the related primitive type (or structure). Originally we have had
the `ConvertedType` enum in the Thrift file representing all the possible
logical types. After a while we realized it is hard to extend and so introduced
the `LogicalType` union. For backward compatibility reasons we allow to use the
old `ConvertedType` values according to the specified rules but we expect that
the logical types in the file schema are defined with `LogicalType` objects.

The following LogicalTypes are supported:
* `STRING`
* `MAP`
* `LIST`
* `ENUM`
* `DECIMAL` (for which primitives?)
* `DATE`
* `TIME`: **(Which unit, utc?)**
* `TIMESTAMP`: **(Which unit, utc?)**

> * `INTEGER`: (all bitwidth 8, 16, 32, 64) **(unsigned?)**

Reviewer 3: I think parquet-cpp and parquet-mr both support unsigned right? I checked Impala and it would just interpret it as a signed integer. I think it's not the only engine consuming parquet than only has signed types.

I guess included unsigned here seems fairly reasonable, but it would come with the caveat that the behaviour is implementation-dependent about how the cast to signed would be handled (e.g. allowing overflow or not).

Reviewer 2: > I think parquet-cpp and parquet-mr both support unsigned right? 

parquet-cpp definitely does, since C++ has native unsigned integers (i.e. no cast to signed is involved).

Author: I am aware of only one implementation where the cast can be a problem, this is parquet-mr. There is no native support for unsigned values in primitives in java. In parquet-mr we give back the original bitmap in the related primitive (so a long for an unsigned int64) and it is up to the client to deal with the value. If the related client does not check the logical type (so realize that the value is unsigned) then the value might be represented incorrectly. 
I think this would be a case in Hive. Meanwhile, I am not aware of any SQL engines that would write unsigned int values so currently it does not seem to be a problem.
If we want to be on the safe side we should not add unsigned values because of the java limitations but I am not sure about this because of the issue would be on the client side of parquet-mr and not parquet-mr itself. What do you think?

* `UUID` **(?)**

NOTE: The old ConvertedType `INTERVAL` has no representation in LogicalTypes.
This is becasue `INTERVAL` is deprecated so we do not include it in this list.

### Encodings

The following encodings are supported:
* [PLAIN](Encodings.md#plain-plain--0)  
  parquet-mr: Basically all value types are written in this encoding in case of
  V1 pages
* [PLAIN\_DICTIONARY](Encodings.md#dictionary-encoding-plain_dictionary--2-and-rle_dictionary--8)
  **(?)**  
  parquet-mr: As per the spec this encoding is deprecated while we still use it
  for V1 page dictionaries.
* [RLE](Encodings.md#run-length-encoding--bit-packing-hybrid-rle--3)  
  parquet-mr: Used for both V1 and V2 pages to encode RL and DL and for BOOLEAN
  values in case of V2 pages
* [DELTA\_BINARY\_PACKED](Encodings.md#delta-encoding-delta_binary_packed--5)
  **(?)**  
  parquet-mr: Used for V2 pages to encode INT32 and INT64 values.
* [DELTA\_LENGTH\_BYTE\_ARRAY](Encodings.md#delta-length-byte-array-delta_length_byte_array--6)
  **(?)**  
  parquet-mr: Not used directly
* [DELTA\_BYTE\_ARRAY](Encodings.md#delta-strings-delta_byte_array--7)
  **(?)**  
  parquet-mr: Used for V2 pages to encode BYTE\_ARRAY and

>   FIXED\_LEN\_BYTE\_ARRAY values

Reviewer 6: Looking at the source code, the three DELTA encodings are not yet supported in Arrow parquet-cpp? (@emkornfield is that correct?)

Reviewer 2: Parquet C++ should now support DELTA_BINARY_PACKED for reading.

Reviewer 2: Update: Parquet C++ now supports all encodings on the read side (which is sufficient here).

* [RLE\_DICTIONARY](Encodings.md#dictionary-encoding-plain_dictionary--2-and-rle_dictionary--8)
  **(?)**  

>   parquet-mr: Used for V2 page dictionaries

Reviewer 6: I *think* in Arrow parquet-cpp you can use RLE_DICTIONARY (when asking for version=2) without also using V2 data pages

Reviewer 3: Impala 3.4 and below wouldn't support this, FWIW.

I also recently implemented this in Impala and on the read side it's orthogonal to the data page version, but does require additional code: IMPALA-6434

Author: Another general choice here. Do we want to add encodings that might not supported widely yet at the first round or add only the ones we regularly use and leave the rest (maybe some even newer ones) for a later release?
